PostgrSQL - Case Study (#25)
NoroffFEU/development-platforms: postgreSQL-case-study.md

---
title: PostgreSQL Case Study
keywords: development platforms, postgreSQL, database, datastores
tags: Development Platforms, postgreSQL, database, datastores
sidebar: development-platforms
permalink: development-platforms/postgresql.html
folder: development-platforms
---

## Introduction

### Introction to databases
A database is a collection of information stored within a computer, thus we can store, maintain and access that data. Databases can collect information on people, thing and places in one place so it can be organized, observed and analyzed. There are many different types of databases with each type providing different functionality to their users. The different types of databases also has each their own strengts and weaknesses based on how they are designed. 

> * Relational database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Relational database
```

>      The most common type. Here, data is organized into tables(also called entities) and uses relationships between those tables to manage and retrieve information. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     The most common type. Here, data is organized into tables (also called entities) and uses relationships between those tables to manage and retrieve information. 
```

Please make sure brackets are surrounded on both sides with a space, unless at the end of a sentence.

     Some types of relational database include:
     * Hierarchical databases
     * Network databases
     * Object-oriented databases(OOD)

     Examples of relational databases:
     * MySQL
     * PostgreSQL
     * Oracle

> * Non-relational/NoSQL database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Non-relational/NoSQL database
```

>      Also a very common type. In a non-relational database, the data within is unstructured. This allows them to process larger amounts of data, making it faster and easier to expand in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     In a non-relational database, the data within is unstructured. This allows them to process larger amounts of data, making it faster and easier to expand in the future. This is an increasingly popular approach.
```

>      A list of some different types of non-relational databases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A list of some different types of non-relational databases:
```

Formatting/indentation

     * Document databases stores data in document format. MondoDB is this type of database.
     * Key-value databases stores data in a model that pairs a key with an associated value. Berkely DB, Dynamo and Redis uses this type of database.
     * Graph databases stores data that is connected through defined relationships, it uses nodes, edges and properties to represent and store said data. Neo4j, ArangoDB and Amazon Netune are this type of database.
     * Wide column stores data using columns, row, tables much like in a relational database, but formatting and naming conventions can vary across rows in a single database table. DBMSs data uses this type are ScyllaDB, Cassandra and Microsoft Azure Cosmos DB.

>      In this study, we will be taking a closer look at PostgreSQL which is an Object Relational Database Management System, ORDBMS for short. This means that in addition to being a relational database, PostgreSQL also supports object oriented concepts such as classes, objects and inheritances in this database. It is present in the ground level between the RDBMS and OODBMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this study, we will be taking a closer look at PostgreSQL, which is an Object Relational Database Management System, ORDBMS for short. This means that in addition to being a relational database, PostgreSQL also supports object-oriented concepts such as classes, objects and inheritances in this database. It is present at the ground level between the RDBMS and OODBMS.
```

In Markdown we don't indent paragraphs in the same way as a word document, etc.

* Supports storage of binary large objects(blob) including pictures, sounds, and videos.
* Full-text search

Read more: https://www.postgresql.org/about/featurematrix/

## Strengths

### Open-source
PostgreSQL is an open-source database making it free to use which allows users to use, modify and implement as they want. Thus it has a strong and active community that has contributed to its development. This type of community-driven development has resulted in a lot of participation from its users. 

### Programming language support
In addition to being a free and open-source software, it has support for writing functions(programming languages) such as:
    SQL, Python, Perl, Tcl, Java, R, Javascript, shell, and Lua.

### Extensibility
PostgreSQL is designed to be extensible. It allows you to define your own data types, index types, operators, functional languages, access methods etc, making PostgreSQL extremely programmable.  

### Scalability
Scalability is how a system/database can handle a growing amount of demands by adding resources, and PostgreSQL can do just that. It can handle large amounts of data and it scales up as the data grows. 

### ACID Compliant

> PostgreSQL is reliable because it is ACID(Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability) compliant meaning queries will maintain data integrity. POSTGRES is known for its rock-solid referential and transactional integrity. ACID in a database system refers to four properties of a transaction. These sets of properties make sure a database transaction are processed reliably before and after. Transactions in this case refer to a set of actions/operations that are used to perform some logical set of work that accesses and can possibly modify the contents of a database. We can access the transactions using read and write operations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL is reliable because it is ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability) compliant, meaning queries will maintain data integrity. POSTGRES is known for its rock-solid referential and transactional integrity. ACID in a database system refers to four properties of a transaction. These properties make sure database transactions are processed reliably before and after. Transactions, in this case, refer to a set of actions/operations used to access or modify the contents of a database, such as complex read and write operations. 
```

* PostgreSQL supports modern application features such as JSON, XML etc, while MySQL only supports JSON.
* While PostgreSQL supports advanced data types such as arrays, hstore, and user-defined data types, MySQL only supports standard data types such as numeric, date and time, string, spatial and the JSON data type.
* PostgreSQL is maintained by developers who volunteer, while MySQL is maintained by Oracle Corporation.
* PostgreSQL is also fully ACID compliant while MySQL is ACID compliant only through InnoDB and NDB Cluster Storage engines. 
* In terms of how the learning curve is for these databases, PostgreSQL may be harder for beginners to learn compared to MySQL which is more user-friendly as takes less time to build a project from scratch.

#### Similarities
* Both rely on SQL which enables tables to be joined using few lines of code.
* Both PostgreSQL and MySQL have communities to provide support to their users where they have many volunteers that devote their time to offer free advice, recommendation and support to users.
* On both DBMSs, you can use JSON for transporting and storing data, objects, and arrays.

## Summary

> PostgreSQL, also known as Postgres, is a free and open-source Object Relational Database Management system with more than 30+ years of active development. It dates back to '80s when it was created by a computer science professor named Michael Stonebraker at the University of California, Berkley. It has then been renamed twice and now called PostgreSQL to signify the relationship between the original name and the use of SQL. It has many advanced features that safely store and scale the most complicated workloads. Though PostgreSQL has its strength with its many built-in features and more such as supporting many programming languages, being extensible, and handling large amount of data, it also has its challenges. PostgreSQL has a steep learning curve, making it hard for beginners and it also may be slower than other databases in certain workloads. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL, also known as Postgres, is a free and open-source Object Relational Database Management system with more than 30+ years of active development. It dates back to the 80s when it was created by a computer science professor named Michael Stonebraker at the University of California, Berkley. It has since been renamed twice and is now called PostgreSQL to signify the relationship between the original name and the use of SQL. It has many advanced features that safely store and scale the most complicated workloads. Though PostgreSQL has its strength with its many built-in features and more such as supporting many programming languages, being extensible, and handling large amounts of data, it also has its challenges. PostgreSQL has a steep learning curve, making it hard for beginners, and it also may be slower than other databases in certain circumstances. 
```
